## Conclusion
{:#conclusion}

In this paper, we presented a modular, builder-based architecture for constructing extensible SPARQL parsers.
By embracing runtime modularity, declarative rule definitions, and strong typing,
our approach enables a new class of SPARQL tools that can evolve alongside a rapidly diversifying query ecosystem.
Through our demonstration, we showed that parser modification can be performed with minimal overhead and high confidence in correctness.

Looking ahead, several important challenges remain.

1. In order to bootstrap the adoption of the modular parser, a robust, default parser with a well-defined Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) format should be created.
This AST should support round-tripping—ensuring that a query parsed into the AST and then regenerated from it yields a string-identical query.
This requirement on the AST will facilitate the creation of language tools such as linters. 
2. To support such round-tripping, we will need to design a corresponding generator.
This generator could follow architectural patterns established by the [Babel JavaScript compiler](cite:cites babel) combined with the builder pattern described in this work. 
3. We envision the need for a flexible AST transformer system that makes it easy to map the AST into alternative representations.
Such a transformer will facilitate static analysis, query-optimization, and translation to other query languages.

Together, these next steps would complete a robust pipeline:
from parsing, through transformation, to code generation—all powered by modular, declarative components.
We hope this work provides a foundation for building SPARQL tools that are not only adaptable to change, but actively enable it.

**Acknowledgements.** Jitse De Smet is a predoctoral fellow of the Research Foundation – Flanders (FWO) (1SB8525N).
Ruben Taelman is a postdoctoral fellow of the Research Foundation – Flanders (FWO) (1202124N).
